1 - If anyone has been castrated by surgeons for a disease, or has been castrated by barbarians, let him remain in the clergy. But if anyone has castrated himself when well, he must be dismissed even if he is examined after being in the clergy. And henceforth no such person must be promoted to Holy Orders. But as is self-evident, though such is the case as regards those who affect the matter and dare to castrate themselves, if any persons have become eunuchs by barbarians or their lords, but are otherwise found to be worthy, the canon admits such persons to the clergy.
2 - Inasmuch as many things, whether of necessity or otherwise are urgently demanded by men or have been demanded by men, have been done contrary to the ecclesiastical canon so that men who have but recently come to the faith from a heathen life and have been catechized for only a short time, have been conducted directly to the spiritual bath; and as soon as baptized have been given an episcopate or the priesthood, it has seemed well henceforth to have no such thing occur. For the catechumen needs more time and a longer trial after baptism. The Apostolic letter is also plain which says, "not a novice, lest being lifted up with pride he falls into the Devil's snare". If, on the other hand, in the course of time any psychical [Greek psyhikos; pertaining to the soul, that is, the mind, the heart and will] sin is found against the person, and it is exposed by two or three witnesses, let such a person be dismissed from the clergy. As for anyone acting contrary hereto, as having the hardihood to do things opposed to the great Synod, he himself shall be in danger of losing his standing in the clergy.
3 - The great Synod has generally forbidden any bishop, priest or deacon, or anyone else among those in the clergy, the privilege of having a housekeeper; unless she is either a mother, a sister, an aunt, or a person above suspicion.
4 - It is most proper that a bishop should be installed by all those in his province. But if such a thing is difficult either because of the urgency of circumstances, or because of the distance to be traveled, at least three should meet together somewhere, and by their votes combined with the votes of those who are absent and join in the election by letter, they should thereafter carry out the ordination. But as for the ratification of the proceedings, let it be entrusted in each province to the metropolitan.
5 - As regards those who have been denied communion, whether clergy or laity, by the bishops in every eparchy, let the opinion prevail expressed in the canon prescribing that those rejected by some are not to be received by others. But let an investigation be made as to whether or not they have been unchurched on account of smallness of soul or contentiousness or any other such repugnancy of the bishop. In order, therefore, that a proper investigation may be made, it has seemed well that synods be held twice every year. In each eparchy and in a common discussion held by all the bishops of the eparchy assembled together. For this purpose let such questions be considered and decided upon. And thus those who have admittedly clashed with the bishop would seem to be reasonably excluded from communion until such time as by common consent of the bishops it may seem better to let a more philanthropic vote be given in their behalf. As for these synods, let one of them be held before the Great Fast, in order that, with the elimination of all smallness of soul, the gift may be offered to God in all its purity; and let the second one be held sometime in autumn.
6 - Let the ancient customs prevail which were in practice in Egypt, Libya and Pentapolis, to allow the Bishop of Alexandria to have authority over all these parts, since this is also the treatment usually accorded to the Bishop of Rome. Likewise with reference to Antioch, and in other provinces, let the seniority be preserved to the Churches. In general it is obvious that in the case in which anyone has been made a bishop without the metropolitan's approval, the great Synod has prescribed that such a person must not be a bishop. If however, concerning the common vote of all, though reasonable and in accordance with an ecclesiastical canon, two or three men object on account of contentiousness, let the vote of the majority prevail.
7 - Inasmuch as a custom has prevailed, and an ancient tradition, for the Bishop in Aelia [Jerusalem] to be honored, let him have the sequence of honor, with the metropolitan having his own dignity preserved.
8 - As concerning those who call themselves Cathari and who are claiming to be adherents of the catholic and apostolic Church, it has seemed right to the holy and great Synod, when they have had hands laid upon them, to let them remain in the clergy. Above all, that it is fitting for them to confess to this in uniting, to wit, that they will agree to and will adhere to the dogmas of the catholic and apostolic Church. That is, that they will hold communion with persons married a second time, and with those who in time of persecution have lapsed from the faith; regarding whom a length of time has been fixed, and a due season has been set for their repentance.<br /><br />This is so that they may adhere to the dogmas of the Catholic Church in everything. Wherever they are the only ones found to have been ordained, whether in villages or in cities, they shall remain in the same habit (or order). But wherever there is a bishop of the Catholic Church, where some of them [cathari] are joining it, it is obvious that, as the bishop of the Church will keep the dignity of bishop, the one called a bishop among the so-called Cathari shall have the honor of a priest, unless it should seem better to the bishop that he should share in the honor of the name. But if this does not please him, he shall devise a position either of a chorepiscopus or of a priest, with the object of having him seems to be wholly in the clergy, or else there would then be two bishops in the same city.
9 - If some persons have been promoted to the priesthood without due examination, or when given a hearing confessed their sins to them, and after they confessed, these men, acting contrary to the canon, laid hands upon such persons, the canon will not admit them. For the Catholic Church insists upon irreproachability.
10 - As many persons as have been guilty of serious lapses and have been ordained in ignorance thereof or even after the ordainers have become aware thereof, they will not be admitted under the ecclesiastical canon. For when they have become known, they shall be deposed.
11 - Concerning those who have transgressed without any need, without being deprived of goods, without being in any peril or in any such strait as occurred during the tyranny of Licinius, it has seemed fit to the Synod to be kind to them, even though they did not deserve philanthropic treatment. As many, therefore, as sincerely repent with remorse shall pass three years among listeners as believers, and seven years as kneelers. In addition; for two years without communicating with the offering, they may pray with the people.
12 - As for those persons who were summoned by grace, and after displaying a preliminary enthusiasm and taking off their [army] belts, they returned like dogs to their vomit, in such a way that some of them even wasted money in an effort to re-establish themselves in the army by means of beneficial (a Latin word meaning gift), let them be kneelers for ten years after devoting three years as listeners. But in addition to all these requirements it is requisite to examine into the will (or inclinations) and the kind of repentance. For as regards all those who with fear, and tears, and patience, and the doing of good to others have displayed proofs of their conversion by actual performance and not by mere pretense, after they have fulfilled the time fixed for their listening period, they shall participate in prayers unrestrictedly, with the further concession of a right to the bishop to devise some more philanthropic treatment regarding them. But as for those who acted unconcernedly, and who thought the pretense of going to church a sufficient proof of their conversion, let them fulfill the time to the utmost limit.
13 - Concerning those who are exiting [from life, by dying], the old and canonical Law shall be kept even now, so that, if anyone is exiting, he should not be deprived of the necessary support [Divine Mystery]. However, when all hope is gone and he has been given communion, if he again is found among the living, let him stay with those who participate in prayer only. In general, moreover, as concerning anyone at all that is on the verge of making his exit, if he asks to partake of the Eucharist, let the bishop examine him and then impart the oblation.
14 - Concerning catechumens and lapsers, it has seemed proper to the holy great Synod to let them off with only three years' listening and to allow them thereafter to pray together with catechumens.
15 - Because of much disturbance and the mutinies which took place, it has seemed best to do away altogether with the custom which obtained contrary to the Apostolic canon in some places, so as not to allow either a bishop or a priest or a deacon to go from one city to another. If after the holy and great Synod's definition, anyone should attempt to do such a thing, or has actually undertaken to do such a thing, let the resulting affair be invalidated by all means, and let him be reinstated in the church in which the bishop or priest in question was ordained.
16 - Any priests or deacons, or other persons covered by the canon, who take the risk, without having the fear of God before their eyes, or keeping aware of the ecclesiastical canon, of departing from their own church, they must not be admitted at all in another church, but they must be strictly forced to return to their own parish, or, in case they insist, it is proper for them to be excluded from Communion. If on the other hand, anyone should surreptitiously snatch away one belonging to another and ordain him in his own church, without the consent of his bishop, from whom the one covered by the canon departed, let the ordination be invalid.
17 - Because of the fact that many persons covered by the canon, out of greed and in pursuit of shameful gain (willfully) forgot the divine passage of Holy Scripture saying "who has not lent out his money at interest," and in lending demanded a profit, the holy and great Synod has deemed it just and right that in case anyone is found after the adoption of this definition receiving interest for the use of money, or otherwise exploiting the matter, or demanding commission, or through any other subterfuge contriving to exact shameful profits, he shall be deposed from the clergy and shall be an alien to the canon.
18 - It has come to the notice of the holy and great Synod that in some regions and cities deacons are giving the Eucharist to priests, which is something that neither the canon nor custom has allowed those who have not the authority to offer, to give the Body of Christ to those offering it. It has also further been learned that already some deacons touch the Eucharist even before the bishops. Let all these things, therefore, be done away with, and let deacons conform to their own standards, well knowing that they are servants of the bishop, and that they are inferior to priests. Let them take the Eucharist in due order after the priests, with either the bishop or the priests administering it to them. But neither let it be permissible for deacons to sit among priests for to do so is contrary to the canon, and is contrary to due order: if in this disregard of these definitions, anyone refuses to obey, let him be dismissed from his diaconate.
19 - Concerning the Paulianists who afterwards took refuge in the Catholic Church, it is established that they be rebaptized without fail. If in the past any of them have been covered [ordained] in the clergy, if under close examination are shown to be blameless and irreproachable, after rebaptism let them be ordained by a Bishop of the Orthodox Catholic Church. But if the investigation finds them unfit, let them be deposed. Likewise as concerning deaconesses, and all those who are embraced by the canon in any way and are being examined, the same form shall be observed. We have referred to the deaconesses who have been examined under cover of the habit, since they have neither any claim to appointment to any order, so that they are to be examined without fail among the laymen.
20 - Since there are some persons who kneel in church on the Lord's Day and on the days of Pentecost, with a view to preserving uniformity in all parishes, it has seemed best to the Holy Synod for prayers to be offered to God while standing.