1 - We pronounce it just and right that the canons promulgated by the Holy Fathers, in each and every Synod down to the present time, continue in full force and effect.
2 - If any bishop ordain anyone for money, and make merchandise of the unsellable grace, and perform the ordination of a bishop, chorepiscopus, priest, deacon, or any one on the roll of the clergy, with a view to gain; or nominate any steward, ecdicus, or paramonarius, or anyone else that belongs to the canon, for money, with the object of making a shameful profit for himself: let him who is found guilty of having undertaken this stand in peril of his office; and let him who has been thus ordained have no benefit from such traffic in ordinations or nominations, but, on the contrary, let him be without any claim upon the dignity or job which he has thus obtained by means of money. If, in fact, anyone even appear as a middleman or factor or intermediary for such shameful and illicit deals, let him too, if he be a clergyman, forfeit his office; but if he be a layman or a monk, let him be anathematized.
3 - It is come to the (knowledge of the) Synod that some of those who had been listed in the roll of the clergy hire other men's estates for the sake of filthy lucre, and undertake to negotiate secular affairs, to the neglect of the Divine Liturgy, and betake themselves to the families of secular men, whose estates they undertake to manage out of love of money. Therefore the holy and great Synod decrees that no bishop, clergyman, or shall henceforth be allowed to farm any estate or office, or to involve himself in secular cares, unless he be unavoidably called by laws to the guardianship of minors, or the bishop permit him to take care of the affairs of the church, or of those of orphans or widows unprovided for, and of persons in especial need of ecclesiastical assistance, for the fear of God. If anyone presume to transgress hereafter any of the rules herein decreed, that person shall be liable to ecclesiastical penalties.
4 - Let them who sincerely and truly enter upon monastic life be accorded due honor. But inasmuch as some use the monk's garb to disturb the affairs of the Church and civil government, by going round in the cities negligently disregarding their duties, and even undertaking to build themselves monasteries, it is decreed that no one shall anywhere build or establish any monastery or any oratory (i.e. prayerhouse) without the consent and approval of the bishop of the city; and that monks in every city and country be subject to the bishop, and embrace quietude, and pay heed only to fasting and prayer, while continuing in the places patiently to which they have been assigned, without intruding upon or meddling in ecclesiastical affairs, nor leaving their own monasteries, unless at any time they be permitted to do so by the bishop of the city on account of some exigency; and that no one shall receive a slave into the monasteries to become a monk, without his owner's consent and approval. We have decreed that anyone transgressing this rule of ours shall be excluded from communion, in order that the name of God be not blasphemed. The bishop of the city, however, is required to make proper provision for monasteries.
5 - As regards bishops or clergymen who go from city to city, it has seemed fitting that the canons laid down by the Holy Fathers should remain in effect and be enforced.
6 - It is decreed that no one shall be ordained at large either a priest or a deacon, nor anything else at all in the ecclesiastical ranks unless he be particularly assigned to the church of some city, or to a martyry, or to a monastery. As for those ordained at large the Holy Synod has determined that any such chirothesy shall be null and void, and that such ordinees shall not be allowed to officiate anywhere, to the dishonor of the ordainer.
7 - We have decreed in regard to those who have once been enrolled in the clergy or who have become monks shall not join the army nor obtain any secular position of dignity. Let those be anathematized who dare to do this and fail to repent, so as to return to that which they had previously chosen on God's account.
8 - As for the clergymen attached to poorhouses or monasteries or martyries, let them remain under the authority of the bishop of the city in question, and not disrespectfully desert their own bishop, in accordance with the teaching imparted by the holy Fathers. As regards those who dare to defy any such formal ruling, in any manner whatever, and who refuse to submit to their own bishop, in case they are clergymen let them be liable to the penalties prescribed by the canons, but if they are monks or laymen, let them be excluded from communion.
9 - If any clergyman has a dispute with another, let him not leave his own bishop and resort to secular courts, but let him first submit his case to his own bishop, or let it be tried by referees chosen by both parties and approved by the bishop. Let anyone who acts contrary hereto be liable to canonical penalties. If, on the other hand, a clergyman has a dispute with his own bishop, or with some other bishop, let it be tried by the Synod of the province. But if any bishop or clergyman has a dispute with the metropolitan of the same province, let him apply either to the exarch of the diocese or to the throne of the imperial capital Constantinople, and let it be tried before him.
10 - Let no clergyman be entitled to be on the roll of the churches of two different churches at the same time, i.e., of that in which he was originally ordained, and of that to which he has resorted on the plea that it appeals to him more than the other because of its being a larger church, when in reality he is actuated by vainglory. As for those who do so, let them be reinstated in their own church, wherein they were originally ordained, and let them officiate there only. If, on the other hand, anyone has been already translated from one church to another, let him have nothing to do with the affairs of the former church, as regards the martyry connected to it, or the poorhouses, or the inns, administered by it. As for those who dare to do anything hereby prohibited, after the definition of this great and ecumenical Synod, this Holy Synod has decided that he shall forfeit his own rank.
11 - As for all those who are indigent and in need of assistance, upon proof, we have made it a rule that they are to travel only with pacific ecclesiastical letters, and not with recommendatory letters; for recommendatory letters are to be granted only to persons who are under suspicion.
12 - It has come to our knowledge that some persons, by resorting to the civil authorities, have obtained pragmatics whereby they have contrived to divide one province into two, contrary to the ecclesiastical canons, and as a result there are two metropolitans in one and the same province. The Holy Synod has therefore made it a rule that no bishop shall hereafter be allowed to do such a thing. For, if anyone shall attempt to do so, he shall forfeit his own rank. As for all those cities which have already been honored with the name of metropolis by letters of the emperor, let them enjoy only the honor, and likewise the bishop who is administering its church; it being left plain that the rights properly belonging to the real metropolis are to be preserved to this metropolis (alone).
13 - Strange clergymen and anagnosts are not to be allowed to conduct services anywhere in a different city without having letters recommendatory from their own bishop.
14 - Inasmuch as anagnosts and chanters in some provinces have been permitted to marry, the Holy Synod has made it a rule that none of them shall be allowed to take a wife that is of a different faith. As for those who have already had children as a result of such a marriage, if they have already had their offspring baptized by heretics, let them bring them into the communion of the Orthodox Catholic Church. But if they have not baptized them, let them no longer have any right to baptize them with heretics, nor, indeed, even to contract a marriage with a heretic, or a Jew, or a Greek, unless they first promise and undertake to convert the person joined to the Orthodox Christian to the Orthodox faith. If, on the other hand, anyone transgresses this rule of the Holy Synod, let him be liable to a canonical penalty.
15 - Let no woman be ordained a deaconess before the age of forty, and even then after a strict test. But if she, after receiving the gift of chirothesy and remaining for some time in the ministry, proceeds to give herself in marriage, thus insulting the grace of God, let any such actress be anathematized together with the man who has joined himself with her in marriage.
16 - If any virgin has dedicated herself to the Lord God, or any men likewise have become monks, let them not be permitted to engage in marriage. If, however, they be found to be doing this, let them be denied communion, and be excluded from there. But we have made it a rule that the local bishop is to have control of kindliness in regard to the treatment of them.
17 - Concerning rural parishes, or country parishes, in any province, they shall remain in the undisputed possession of the bishops now holding them, and especially if they have held them in their possession and have managed them without coercion for thirty years or more. But if during a period of thirty years there has arisen or should arise some dispute concerning them, those claiming to have been unjustly treated shall be permitted to complain to the Synod of the province. But if anyone has been unjustly treated by his own metropolitan, let him complain to the Exarch of the diocese, or let him have his case tried before the throne of Constantinople, according as he may choose. If, on the other hand, any city has, been rebuilt by imperial authority, or has been built anew again, pursuant to civil and public formalities, let the order of the ecclesiastical parishes be followed.
18 - The crime of conspiracy, or of faction (by a group) already prohibited by secular laws, ought still more to be forbidden to appear in the Church of God. If, therefore, there be found any clergymen, or monastics, to be conspiring or to be engaged in factiousness of any kind, or hatching plots against bishops or fellow clergymen, they shall forfeit their own rank altogether.
19 - It has come to our ears that the canonically prescribed synods of bishops are not held in the provinces, and as a result of this fact many ecclesiastical matters in need of correction are neglected. The holy Synod, therefore, has made it a rule, in accordance with the canons of the Holy Fathers, for the bishops to meet twice a year in convention somewhere in each province, wherever the bishop of the metropolis designates, and for all matters to be corrected that may come up. As for those bishops, on the other hand, who fail to attend the meeting, but who, instead of doing so, remain at home in their respective cities, and lead their lives therein in good health and free from every indispensable and necessary occupation, they are to be reprimanded in a brotherly way.
20 - As we have already decreed, it is not permissible for clergymen officiating in a church to be given a church in another city; but, on the contrary, they must rest content with the one in which they were originally deemed worthy to conduct divine services: except those who have gone over to another church as a result of their having been forced to flee from their own country. If any bishop nevertheless admits a clergyman belonging to another bishop, after promulgation of this rule, it has been decided that both of them, i.e., the clergyman so admitted and the bishop admitting him, are to be excluded from communion until such time as the clergyman who has left his own city see fit to return to his own church.
21 - Clergymen or laymen accusing bishops or clergymen are not to be allowed to file charges against them promiscuously and without investigation until their own reputation has been examined into.
22 - Clergymen, after the death of their own bishop, shall not be allowed to seize his effects, as is prohibited even by the canons of old, on pain of being stripped of their own offices.
23 - It has come to the ears of the holy Synod that certain clergymen and monastics, without being handed any permission by their own bishop, and in fact, sometimes even after he has excluded them from communion, have resorted to the imperial city of Constantinople, and stay there a long time, causing disturbances and meddling the ecclesiastical situation, and engender upheavals in the households of some persons. Hence the holy Synod has decreed that they first be reminded, through the Defensor of the most holy Church of Constantinople, to take their departure from the imperial city. But if they impudently persist in doing the same things, they are to be expelled from the city even against their will through the same defensor, and are to betake themselves to their own regions.
24 - As for monasteries which have once been consecrated with the consent of the bishop, they are to remain monasteries perpetually, and the property owned by them is to be kept safe, and no more be permitted to serve as mundane haunts of vice. Those who permit this to occur are liable to the penalties provided by the canons.
25 - Whereas some metropolitans, as we have been informed, neglect the flocks committed to their care, and postpone the ordinations of bishops, the Holy Synod has decreed that they must perform ordinations within three months unless some unavoidable necessity require the time to be lengthened. If they fail to carry out this rule, they shall be liable to ecclesiastical penalties; and the means profits of the widow church shall be preserved to be retained by the steward (or oeconomus) of the same church.
26 - Since in some churches, as we have been informed, the bishops are administering the ecclesiastical affairs with the services of a steward, it has seemed most reasonable and right that each and every church that has a bishop should also have a steward selected from its own clergy to manage the ecclesiastical affairs of that particular church in accordance with the views and ideas of its own bishop, so as to provide against the administration of the church being unwitnessed, so as to prevent the property of the same church from being wasted as a result of such stewardless administration and to prevent any obloquy from attaching itself to Holy Orders.
27 - The Holy Synod has made it a rule regarding those who take women by force under pretense of marriage, and their accomplices and abettors, that if they should be clergymen, they shall forfeit their own rank, but if they are laymen, they shall be anathematized.
28 - Everywhere following the decrees of the Holy Fathers, and aware of the recently recognized canon of the one hundred and fifty most God-beloved bishops who convened during the reign of Theodosius the Great of pious memory, who became emperor in the imperial city of Constantinople otherwise known as New Rome; we too decree and vote the same things in regard to the privileges and priorities of the most holy Church of that same Constantinople and New Rome. And this is in keeping with the fact that the Fathers naturally enough granted the priorities to the throne of Old Rome on account of her being the imperial capital. And motivated by the same object and aim the one hundred and fifty most God-beloved bishops have accorded the like priorities to the most holy throne of New Rome, with good reason deeming that the city which is the seat of an empire, and of a senate, and is equal to old imperial Rome in respect of other privileges and priorities, should be magnified also as she is in respect of ecclesiastical affairs, as coming next after her, or as being second to her. And it is arranged so that only the metropolitans of the Pontic, Asian, and Thracian dioceses shall be ordained by the most holy throne of the most holy Church of Constantinople, aforesaid, and likewise the bishops of the aforesaid dioceses which are situated in barbarian lands; that is to say, that each metropolitan of the aforesaid dioceses, together with the bishops of the province, shall ordain the bishops of the province, just as is prescribed by the divine canons. But the metropolitans of the aforesaid dioceses, as has been said, are to be ordained by the Archbishop of Constantinople, after the elections have first been conducted in accordance with custom, and have been reported to him.
29 - For a bishop to bear the rank of priest is sacrilege. However, if any just reason determines their removal from practice as bishops, then neither ought they to occupy the position of priest. But if for any cause than some crime they have been deprived of the dignity and office, they shall be restored to the dignity and office of the episcopate.
30 - Whereas the most reverent bishops of Egypt postponed subscribing to the epistle of the most holy Archbishop Leo for the present, not because they opposed the catholic faith, but on the allegation that it is a custom in the diocese of Egypt to do nothing of this sort without the consent and formal approval of their archbishop, and therefore request to be excused until the one who is to be the bishop for the great city of the Alexandrians has been ordained: it has appeared to us reasonable and consonant with the spirit of philanthropy that they be excused and allowed to remain upon the like habit in the Imperial City till an archbishop has been ordained for the great city of the Alexandrians. Let them therefore give security that they will not leave this city till the city of the Alexandrians has been accommodated with a bishop.